.\" SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2026 Tom Haynes <loghyr@gmail.com>
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: AGPL-3.0-or-later
.TH REFFSD 8 "2026-04-08" "reffs" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
reffsd \- reffs NFSv4.2 / NFSv3 file server
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B reffsd
.RB [ \-C
.IR config ]
.RB [ \-p
.IR port ]
.RB [ \-b
.IR backend ]
.RB [ \-B
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-S
.IR path ]
.RB [ \-f
.IR tracefile ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR category ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-r ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B reffsd
is an NFSv4.2 / NFSv3 file server that also implements pNFS Flex Files
(v1 and v2).
It supports multiple storage backends (in-memory, POSIX, RocksDB),
per-export security policies, Kerberos, and RPC-over-TLS (RFC 9289).
.PP
Configuration comes from a TOML file (see
.BR "CONFIGURATION FILE"
below).
Command-line options override the corresponding TOML settings.
.PP
Exports are managed at runtime via the probe protocol (port 20490)
using
.BR reffs-probe.py (1)
or
.BR reffs_probe1_clnt (1).
The
.B [[export]]
section of the TOML file configures only the root export and its
security flavors; all other exports must be created via the probe
protocol after the server starts.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-C " config"
.TQ
.BI \-\-config= config
Load configuration from the TOML file
.IR config .
If not given,
.B reffsd
uses built-in defaults (in-memory storage, port 2049, AUTH_SYS only).
.TP
.BI \-p " port"
.TQ
.BI \-\-port= port
Listen for NFS traffic on
.I port
(default: 2049).
Overrides the
.B port
key in
.BR [server] .
.TP
.BI \-b " type"
.TQ
.BI \-\-backend= type
Storage backend:
.BR ram ,
.BR posix ,
or
.BR rocksdb
(default: \fBram\fR unless specified in the config file).
Overrides the
.B type
key in
.BR [backend] .
.TP
.BI \-B " path"
.TQ
.BI \-\-backend-path= path
Root directory for POSIX or RocksDB backend data.
Overrides the
.B path
key in
.BR [backend] .
.TP
.BI \-S " path"
.TQ
.BI \-\-state-path= path
Directory (or file prefix) used for persistent server state: boot
sequence number, client identity records, lease state, and the export
registry.
Overrides the
.B state_file
key in
.BR [backend] .
Default:
.IR /var/lib/reffs/reffs.state .
.TP
.BI \-f " tracefile"
.TQ
.BI \-\-file= tracefile
Write trace output to
.I tracefile
instead of the default
.IR ./reffsd.log .
Overrides the
.B trace_file
key in
.BR [server] .
.TP
.BI \-c " category"
.TQ
.BI \-\-category= category
Enable a tracing category (may be repeated).
Categories:
.RS
.TS
l l.
0	General
1	I/O
2	RPC
3	NFS
4	NLM
5	FS
6	LOG
7	Security
8	Lifecycle
.TE
.RE
.TP
.B \-i
.TQ
.B \-\-case-insensitive
Enable case-insensitive name lookups (default: case-sensitive).
.TP
.B \-r
.TQ
.B \-\-rpc_dump
Log raw RPC message bodies for debugging.
.TP
.B \-h
.TQ
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The TOML configuration file is divided into tables.
Example files are installed in
.I /usr/share/doc/reffs/examples/
and also available in the source tree under
.IR examples/ .
.SS [server]
.TP
.B port
NFS listen port.
Default: 2049.
.TP
.B bind
IP address to bind.
.B "*"
binds all interfaces.
Default:
.BR "*" .
.TP
.B role
Server role:
.BR standalone ,
.BR mds ,
.BR ds ,
or
.BR combined .
Default:
.BR standalone .
In
.B mds
mode the server issues pNFS Flex Files layouts.
In
.B ds
mode the server accepts DS I/O.
In
.B combined
mode both roles are active using separate superblocks.
.TP
.B minor_versions
Array of NFSv4 minor versions to advertise.
Default:
.BR [1,\ 2] .
.TP
.B grace_period
Grace period in seconds after restart during which clients may
reclaim state.
Default: 45.
.TP
.B workers
Number of io_uring worker threads.
Default: CPU count, capped at 64.
.TP
.B max_session_slots
Maximum number of slots per NFSv4.1 session.
Default: 64.
.TP
.B log_level
Verbosity:
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warn ,
.BR error .
Default:
.BR info .
.TP
.B tls
Enable RPC-over-TLS (RFC 9289).
Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B tls_cert
Path to the PEM-encoded server certificate.
.TP
.B tls_key
Path to the PEM-encoded private key.
.SS [backend]
.TP
.B type
Storage backend:
.BR ram ,
.BR posix ,
.BR rocksdb .
Default:
.BR ram .
.TP
.B path
Root directory for POSIX or RocksDB superblock data.
Default:
.IR /var/lib/reffs/data .
.TP
.B state_file
Path prefix for server state files (boot sequence, client records,
export registry).
Default:
.IR /var/lib/reffs/reffs.state .
.TP
.B ds_path
Root directory for data server storage in combined mode.
.SS [iouring]
.TP
.B network_sq_size
.TQ
.B network_cq_size
io_uring submission and completion queue sizes for the network ring.
Defaults: 2048 / 8192.
.TP
.B backend_sq_size
.TQ
.B backend_cq_size
io_uring queue sizes for the backend I/O ring.
Defaults: 512 / 2048.
.SS [[export]]
Configures the root export (\fB/\fR) and its security policy.
Exports for other paths must be created at runtime via the probe
protocol.
.TP
.B path
Mount path for this export.
Use
.B /
for the root pseudo-export.
.TP
.B [[export.clients]]
Per-client rule (may be repeated; first match wins).
.RS
.TP
.B match
Client specifier:
a single IPv4 or IPv6 address,
a CIDR prefix (\fI192.168.1.0/24\fR),
a hostname wildcard (\fI*.lab.example.com\fR),
or
.B *
(any client).
.TP
.B access
.B rw
(read-write) or
.B ro
(read-only).
Default:
.BR rw .
.TP
.B root_squash
Map UID 0 to 65534 (nobody).
Default:
.BR true .
.TP
.B all_squash
Map all UIDs to 65534.
Default:
.BR false .
.TP
.B flavors
Array of accepted RPC security flavors:
.BR sys ,
.BR krb5 ,
.BR krb5i ,
.BR krb5p ,
.BR tls .
.RE
.SS [[data_server]]
Configures a pNFS data server (MDS and combined roles only; may be
repeated).
.TP
.B id
Numeric data server ID (referenced by
.B sb-set-dstores
in the probe protocol).
.TP
.B address
Hostname or IP address of the data server.
.TP
.B path
Export path on the data server.
.TP
.B protocol
.B nfsv3
(default) or
.BR nfsv4 .
.SH PORTS
.TS
l l.
2049	NFS (TCP, IPv4 and IPv6)
20490	Probe protocol (TCP, IPv4 and IPv6)
.TE
.PP
The probe port is not configurable.
.SH RUNTIME MANAGEMENT
Exports, security flavors, and data server bindings are managed
via the probe protocol while the server is running:
.PP
.RS
.nf
reffs-probe.py sb-list
reffs-probe.py sb-create --path /data --storage posix
reffs-probe.py sb-set-flavors --id 2 --flavors krb5 krb5p
reffs-probe.py sb-mount --id 2 --path /data
.fi
.RE
.PP
See
.BR reffs-probe.py (1)
for the complete command reference.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGTERM
Initiate shutdown.
By default (quick shutdown) reffsd persists critical state and exits
immediately, relying on crash recovery at the next start to rebuild
in-memory structures.
.IP
Set
.B REFFS_GRACEFUL_SHUTDOWN=1
in the environment for a full graceful shutdown that drains all RCU
callbacks, joins all threads, and releases all memory.
Graceful shutdown may take 60 seconds or more under load;
it is intended for CI and development use, not production.
.SH STATE FILES
.TP
.I <state_file>
Server state: boot sequence number, server UUID, slot counter,
and the clean-shutdown flag.
.TP
.I <state_file>/superblocks.registry
Export (superblock) registry: persistent IDs, UUIDs, mount paths,
storage type, and per-export data server bindings.
.TP
.I <state_file>/clients
Append-only log of client identity records (owner string, verifier,
clientid4) for lease recovery across restarts.
.TP
.I <state_file>/client_incarnations
Active client incarnation table.
Uses an atomic rename-swap for crash-safe updates.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B REFFS_GRACEFUL_SHUTDOWN
Set to
.B 1
to enable full graceful shutdown on SIGTERM.
See
.BR SIGNALS .
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Standalone server (in-memory, AUTH_SYS)
.nf
reffsd \-p 2049
.fi
.SS Standalone server from a TOML config file
.nf
reffsd \-C /etc/reffs/reffsd.toml
.fi
.SS pNFS MDS + DS in combined mode
.nf
reffsd \-C /etc/reffs/reffsd-bat.toml
.fi
.SS Start with all tracing enabled
.nf
reffsd \-C /etc/reffs/reffsd.toml \-c 0 \-c 1 \-c 2 \-c 3
.fi
.SS systemd unit
.B reffsd
ships a systemd service unit,
.IR reffsd.service .
Enable and start it with:
.PP
.nf
systemctl enable --now reffsd
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR reffs-probe.py (1),
.BR reffs_probe1_clnt (1),
.BR ec_demo (1),
.BR er_demo (1),
.BR exports (5),
.BR nfs (5),
.BR mount.nfs (8)
.PP
Configuration examples:
.IR examples/reffsd.toml ,
.IR examples/reffsd-mds.toml ,
.IR examples/reffsd-ds.toml ,
.IR examples/reffsd-bat.toml .
.PP
RFC 8881 \(em Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 1 Protocol.
.br
RFC 7862 \(em Network File System (NFS) Version 4 Minor Version 2 Protocol.
.br
RFC 9289 \(em Towards Remote Procedure Call Encryption By Default.
.SH AUTHOR
Tom Haynes <loghyr@gmail.com>
